@node cl
@chapter cl Component files with character string indicies
@cindex cl
@cindex component file

This workspace supports name--value pairs in a component file.  It
uses the APLComponentFiles written by Blake McBride and distributed
with GNU APL.

The workspaces uses the same API as lex.apl.  That is the following
functions:


@deffn ∇ array ← cl∆keys lex

Returns a list of component names.
@end deffn

@deffn ∇ file_handle ←  cl∆init

Creates a component file ant returns a file handle.
@end deffn

@deffn ∇ lex ←  lex cl∆assign name-value

Assigns a component to a name. Will append or overwrite
as appropriate.
@end deffn

@deffn ∇ item ← lex cl∆lookup name

Returns the component with the supplied name.
@end deffn

@deffn ∇ boolean ←  cl∆is lex

Determines if the supplied file handle (an integer) is in
fact a lexicon based component file.
@end deffn

@deffn ∇ array ←  cl∆values lex

Returns all of the components of the file up to a
maximum of cl∆∆max.
@end deffn

@deffn ∇ ('postgresql' or 'sqllite') cl∆open_db db_spec

Opens a database.  This is a wrapper for CF_DBCONNECT. The left
argument identifies the type of database while the right (db_spec)
varies by that type.  Postgress wants a connection string of
'host=hostname user=username password=password dbname=data_base_name'
while sqlite wants a file name.

@end deffn

@deffn ∇ file_handle ← cl∆open filename

Opens a component file and returns a file handle.  cl∆open_db must be
called before cl∆open as the component files are stored in an SQL
database.

@end deffn

@deffn ∇ cl∆close fileHandle

Close a component file.
@end deffn

@deffn ∇ lex ← cl∆close_db

Closes the connection to the database. Function is a wrapper for
CF_DBDISCONNECT.

@end deffn
