@node date
@chapter  Date, an implementation of Lillian dating
@cindex date, an implementation of Lillian dating

This workspace implements Lillian dating, that is storing dates as the
number of days from 10/15/1582.  It was proposed by IBM in 1986, and named
after Aloysius Lilius who devised the Gregorian Calendar.

Lillian dating simplifies date arithmetic as any date is stored as a
simple integer.

This workspace contains the following functions:

@deffn ∇ int ← date∆lillian Date

Returns a Lillian date for a three element vector of year,month,day.
@end deffn

@deffn ∇ vector ← date∆unlillian Lillian_date

Returns a vector of year,month,day from a Lilian date.
@end deffn

@deffn ∇ vector← locale date∆parse date_string

Returns a vector of integers for year, month and day. If date∆parse is
unable to parse the string it will return an error message.

The locale is a lexicon of the following key-value pairs

@itemize
@item months 
(The months spelled out and in order)
@item MTH 
(The months abbreviated and in order)
@item weekdays 
(The days of the week spelled out and in order)
@item wkd 
(The days of the week abbreviated and in order)
@item days 
(The days of the month)
@item two-digit-cutoff 
(The years less than this are in the last
   century).
@item leap-month 
(An integer for the month which has the leap-day)
@item month_pos 
(The position of the month in the numeric dates eg.
   4/5/2016)
@item year_pos 
(The position of the year in numeric dates)
@item day_pos 
(The position of the year in numeric dates)
@item epoch 
(1582 10 15 -- unless one wants something other than lillian
   dates)
@end itemize
   
@end deffn

@defvar date∆US

A locale lexicon for US usage
@end defvar

@defvar date∆cal

An 2 12 shaped array where line one is the days of each month in a
leap year and line two the days of each month in a normal year.
@end defvar

@defvar date∆dates

A lexicon of two name-value pairs.  'Year 0' is 1200. That is the
previous year divisible by 4 that is not a leap year. (The essence of
the Gregorian calendar reform).

'Pre lillian' is the number of days from 1199 12 31 to 1582 10 15.

Its best not to ask why this is needed.
@end defvar

