@node wp
@chapter wp Workspace
@cindex wp
@cindex workpapers
@cindex print arrays

A workspace to print arrays for an accountant. This workspace is very
much a work-in-process and is included here as a test of many of the
libraries published here and a test of their basic design.

Accountants have specific requirements for their work papers. They
must show the company about whom the work was prepared.  They must
describe the work paper including the period as of which is was
prepared (e.g., year ended 12/31/1957), the date of preparation, amd
the author. Each of these data is stored with the underlying data as
described below.

Three functions to use this system are  wp∆init
and wp∆assemble and wp∆txt∆assemble. More will follow

@section Work Paper Lexicon

A work paper is a lexicon of many elements:

@table @option

@item Data

This is the actual array that will be printed.  Make the column
headings line one of the array.

@item Entity

The name of the company, or other entity about which this work paper
was prepared.

@item Title

A General description of the work period

@item Period

The time period of the data.  Balance sheets are the balance at the
end of business on a day while income statements are for a period
ended on a date.

@item Id
A short identifying string, like A1, B6.

@item Author

The maker of the work paper, generally an initial.

@item Attributes

An array the same size and shape and the data. Each cell is a lexicon
which supplies the HTML attributes to guide one's browser on the
display of the cell.

A special attribute @code{format} may be used to convert the numbers to
characters. wp∆assemble will execute @code {format ⍕ cell_value} in
the assembly process rather than supplying the attribute to one's
browser.

See wp∆defaultcss below for a recipe for assembling this monster.

@item Stylesheet

A cascading style sheet.  Refer to the xml workspace documentation for
how to assemble the style sheet.

There is a default style sheet, wp∆defaultcss, which we recommend.  It
provides several classes to display various parts of your
work paper. See wp∆defaultcss below.

@end table


@section Functions in the workspace

@deffn ∇ html ← wp∆assemble workpaper

Returns an html page.

@end deffn

@deffn ∇ txt ← wp∆txt∆assemble wp

Returns text. One may see the results of one's work with @code
{⍞←wp∆txt∆assemble workpaper}
@end deffn

@deffn ∇ wp ← wp∆init 'Id'

Create a work paper. You will be prompted for each item in the
work paper lexicon.  The program uses the top-quit-done paradigm:

@table @option 
@item top
Go to the first prompt
@item quit
Leave the program and abandon your work.
@item done
Leave the program and return the completed work paper lexicon
@item back
Go back one prompt
@end table

@end deffn

@section wp∆defaultcss and its' ilk

wp∆defaultcss is a cascading style sheet as implemented in the xml
workspace.  That is a lexicon of selectors. Each selector is itself a
lexicon of css attributes that instruct the browser in how to display
the select html elements. (Function xml∆mkSheet returns the text
document that the browser works with.)

wp∆defaultcss defines a series of classes that can be assigned to a
cell in one's table, viz.

@verbatim
      Attr[cellrow;cellcol]←(lex∆init)lex∆assign 'class' 'number'
@end verbatim

The number class is right justified.  Control the appearance of the
number with format, viz.

@verbatim
      Attr[cellrow;cellcol]←Attr[cellrow;cellcol] lex∆assign 'format' '(55,530)'
@end verbatim

wp∆defaultcss classes   :

@table @option
@item colhead
Column headers.  For instance:
@verbatim
      Attr[1;]←⊂(lex∆init)lex∆assign 'class' 'colhead'
@end verbatim

@item number
Right justified cells

@item page-head
Special font for the heading of the work paper. That is the entity,
description and period.

@item initial-block
Special font for the author and date of the work paper

@end table
